# MedfireAran
Code of the MedfireAran model, a fire regime simulation model for the Aran Valley, Spain

The MedfireAran is a model that aims to reproduce the Aran fire regime (spatial and temporal fire patterns) based on the relationship between wildfires, climate, and landscapes. The final goal is to assess changing fire regimes and their impacts because of spatial interactions between climate and management (including landscape management and fire suppression strategies). The publication with the whole model details, calibration, and validation is under preparation: Oliveres, J., Castellnou, M., Rosas-Casals. M., Brotons, L. and Duane, A. Time for Managed Wildfire in Europe: the pioneering Integrated Fire Management Plan of the Aran, Pyrenees. 2024. A detailed document with further explanation is available in this repository, in Catalan. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11238569 

The model works for the whole Aran territory. Spatial resolution is 100 meters, and temporal resolution is one year. Within a year, a sequential order of events arises scheduled. Two state variables define each pixel and may change over the years: 1) LCFM: Land cover and forest map. For each pixel, the main cover typology is described, and if the cover is a forest, it includes the main forest tree species (mixed stands are not included); 2) Age: It captures the number of years since the last disturbance. If no disturbance has been reported, it describes vegetation age for vegetated pixels or a large, unmeaningful number for artificial lands. The two state variables vary according to two dynamic processes: a fire regime module that simulates historical wildfires according to (a) ignition spatial probability distributions, (b) frequency of synoptic weather conditions and (c) yearly drought conditions; and a vegetation dynamics module, which simulates species establishment after fire and natural afforestation (from grasses to shrublands and from shrublands to forests). It finally allows the simulation of controlled low-intensity fires in specific areas that influence future fires by decreasing their spread capacity during a time window of seven years after the controlled burn. Wildfires can burn in high intensity or low intensity as a function of 1) the type of weather year (severe drought years always burn in high intensity) and 2) the rate of spread, which depends on the values of the four factors affecting propagation. The threshold for low or high-intensity burning is 0.35 [0-1], corresponding to the value that simulates an 85% or high-intensity fire in Catalonia. Climate change affects the model by increasing the number of severe years with a larger potential annual burnt area. 

The current version of the model is implemented in SELES. The Spatially Explicit Landscape Event Simulator (SELES) platform is a tool of a high-level programming language for constructing and running spatially explicit spatio-temporal landscape models that integrate natural and anthropogenic processes over long time-frames and large spatial areas. The original paper publication with further information is found here: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304380001003349

This repository provides the required coding files to run the Model with the SELES simulator. This consists of three types of file:
-	LandscapeEvents.lse (FireWind, FireTopo, FireSummer, PrescribedBurns, VegDyn)
-	LanDynModel.sel
-	ScnTest1_CLM_PB300.scn
The repository also includes the 10 needed spatial layers (inside the inputlyrs folder) and the 16 input tables (inside the inputfiles folder)to run the model. The ScnTest1_CLM_PB300.scn is an example scenario that simulates the fire regime under climate change and an EFF scenario of 300 hectares. 

